1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. Okay, can you hear me? The
following interview is with Walt Coughlin,
former member of the Secret Service, by Christie
Winderly.
All right, the first thing, what were the various
states that you were in Vietnam? I had the
opportunity on three occasions to go to Vietnam.
The first would be in 1965. The second was the
inauguration of President Tu and Vice President
Ki, which I guess was 1966 from memory. Then one
time after that in late 1967. Okay. What was your
job over there? The reason I was there, I was not in
the military at the time. I was there on all three
occasions with Vice President Humphrey, who was
sent there on a political mission by his
president, President Johnson. And my mission
there was a member of the Secret Service to protect
Mr. Humphrey. Were there any particular ways in
which you carried out this protection? Any things
that were different in Vietnam than they were
ever? Well, obviously, it was a lot of different
because there was a war going on, and there was an
element of risk involved. But the thing we tried to
do was work within the confines of the military
operations. And through that, we would... which
work our security by no one ever knew which
helicopter he was in we take off in different
directions and just the element of surprise with
no schedule and we maintain codes and our radios
and so on so we worked within the confines of the
military in a very secret manner but it was still a
very risky operation okay why did you decide to
join the secret service couldn't get another job
no that's not true um uh when i got out of college i uh
really probably in retrospect would like to go to
law school I guess but I didn't have any money so I
had to get a job and I had friends that were in the fbi
and i they were talking to me about some of the
restraints that mr hoover at the time put on them
and i didn't think i was kind of a free spirit in some
of those things and i didn't think i would have
lasted probably and then i heard about the secret
service which i was not familiar with and the
appeal of the white house and the travel and so on
just it really appealed to me so i applied and i was
fortunate enough to be uh to be uh selected
okay um What were some of the precautions the
Secret Service had to take in protecting the
President and the Vice President? MR. You mean
domestically or internationally or in Vietnam or
just in general? in Vietnam and in the United
States pertaining to Vietnam, such as in the
demonstrations? Well, basically, in the earlier
question, I think we pretty much covered what we
did in Vietnam. We worked in the confines of the
military, and the element of surprise, and we wore
the bulletproof vests and all that type of thing
that you would do in a combat zone normally. We kind
of acted more like soldiers, frankly. But from the
standpoint of general protection, the policy of
the Secret Service protection of the president is
organization, scheduling, logistics. And
within all the confines of a smooth operation, you
hopefully have real good security. You have good
intelligence gathering. good communications
between different police organizations,
motorcade routes and intersection control and
ticket control and access control and ushers and
everything right down to where everyone sits and
when they're supposed to be in their seat. All that
comes under the umbrella of good security. So
basically what you do as a Secret Service agent is
try to organize as best you can down to a scheduled
minute, sometimes to the second. particularly
for television purposes. And under that umbrella
of organization comes, hopefully, good
security.
What were some of the technological developments
at the time? As a result of Vietnam? As a result of
Vietnam and the protection that you had? Well, the
technological developments even today... The
state of the art of technology in every field is
just between computers and radios and chips and
microchips and everything else. Every day it
changes and improves. One thing that did come out
of Vietnam that I thought was worthwhile was some
of the things that we used within the Secret
Service. There was improvement in bulletproof
vests and armament. There were improvements made
in ballistics. There were improvements made in
weapons. There were improvements made in things
like I talked to you about earlier, about night
vision glasses, where it's kind of an infrared
type of glasses you put on. You can see as clear at
night as you can in the daytime. So some of the
technology that came out of Vietnam from a
standpoint of security were excellent
improvements. Okay. What sort of intelligence
were we gaining in Vietnam? You mean we, the Secret
Service, or we, the American people? We, the
American people, and we, the Secret Service.
Maybe you can define the difference. I'm not sure
that, in retrospect, again, that our
intelligence in Vietnam was very good. You know,
the Tet Offensive, obviously, someone missed the
boat. You know, we kept hearing numbers that were
not accurate. I don't, for whatever reason, I
guess you can argue both sides of that. I'm not
convinced that our intelligence apparatus in
Vietnam was effective at all. I knew a lot of CIA
guys that were there, and they were really
frustrated by it all. Because you were dealing
with the Asiatic mind, which in and of itself seems
to be rather secretive.
Even some of the South Vietnamese forces were
sympathetic. to the north, and you never really
knew who your friends were. So I guess from that
standpoint, the intelligence gathering was less
than adequate. And frankly, I think it was very
poor. OK. I was going to go on to ask if it was used
effectively. Do you think that we gained anything
worthwhile that could have been used effectively
that was or was not? Or do you think that that
question is really? Well, if there was something
that was gained that could have been used
effectively, I certainly don't remember. And
that's not to say there wasn't, but I can't come up
with one off the top of my head. Okay. What was your
opinion of the war before going over for the first
time, before you'd ever been in Vietnam? Probably
that of most Americans, that we wouldn't be there
if we weren't right, and I'm a patriot, and I just
assumed that was the case. That was my going in. Did
your opinion change at all? And if so, how and why?
If not, was it strengthened? No, I think my opinion
eventually changed. It wasn't right away. The
more I observed the South Vietnamese, the more I
wasn't sure that they really cared in a lot of ways.
They said all the right things and did all the right
things, but the fact is that they're very passive
people. I'm not sure what their educational
levels were, but they didn't appear to be very high
to me. And it just seemed to me there were so many of
them sympathetic to the North that, and talking to
our troops over there, I'm not sure that they knew
exactly sometimes where the loyalties lied of the
Arvin people. So I think that's probably what
changed my opinion more than anything else, that
in retrospect, we probably, I think we went in
there with good intentions. I think we got bogged
down in a land war in Asia, which history has told us
never to do. And then it got so political towards
the end that all those mistakes just constituted
our downfall. The Americans are very impatient
people. And the thing is that the Asiatics, you
know, time means nothing to them, and they'll
out-weight you. They did that to the French at Dien
Pin Pew, and they did it to the Americans too. You
made the statement that in the end it got to be very
political. Are you talking politically? in the
United States? Yeah, yes. Well, probably in
Vietnam too, but I'm not familiar with the Vietnam
politics, basically. In the United States, it got
to be very political because of the
demonstrations. The media, I think, turned
sympathetic towards the demonstrators. They
turned anti. I think President Johnson backed
himself into a corner that he couldn't get out of.
And well, it was obvious that he did, because
that's why he couldn't run for president in 1968.
You mentioned the morale of the troops, or
actually the idea, the perceptions of the troops
as to who Arvin, which side Arvin was on. What was
the overall morale of the troops? Frustration, I
think. I think they felt hamstrung for political
reasons. That's the way they interpreted what was
going on. I think they... If they have a war to
fight, let's go fight it. There's no such thing as a
nice war. So why try to be nice? If you're going to
fight a war, let's fight it, let's win it, and get
the hell out of here. That was kind of their
attitude. But they won't let us do that. And we're
over here getting killed, and no one knows what's
going on. And we read about what's going on in the
United States. What's it all about? Were there any
geographically based differences that you were
aware of? We've heard that the people who were up
close fighting with the National Vietnamese
Army, that a lot of times they were fighting on a
more conventional sense, whereas the people down
in the Mekong Delta were fighting more guerrilla
warfare. Well, yeah, there was some of that, but I
think mostly it was a guerrilla warfare. I think
the American forces, with all their equipment,
all their training, just were not capable of
handling the guerrilla warfare. And another
thing is I've had guys tell me that they would be
holding a base camp and be overrun by the Viet Cong,
and instead of the Arvin forces taking the wall, to
defend, they would just kind of cowl in the corner,
and the American forces would go to the wall, and
then all of a sudden they'd all be shot in the back by
the Arvin forces, because they just, you know,
they would be your friend until it looked like it
wasn't going to go their way, and then all of a
sudden they were, you were the bad guy. So the
American forces were very frustrated by that. In a
sense of the South Vietnamese people, and Arvin in
particular, do you think it was a matter of them
actually being on the side of the Viet Cong and the
North Vietnamese, or do you think it was more a
sense of survival, that they really didn't much
care philosophically? I think the rank and file,
which is probably what you're referring to, the
peasants, which is basically what the country is,
they probably didn't really know much about it or
care, frankly. They just wanted to be left alone
and grow their rice and stop all this foolishness.
Okay. They're probably no better off today than
they would have been if we'd have won, or no worse
off.
Could you describe any of the changes that the
morale of the troops might have gone through as the
years went by? Well, I think it was no different
than the opinion of our country. I think the troops
eventually started saying, you know, why are we
here? No one will let us do what we have to do. If
indeed we're going to win this thing, let's go win
it. Don't tell us what line we have to stop at or
don't tell us who we can't bomb or when we can't
shoot somebody. If you're in a war, it's in a war.
But the troops got very frustrated by that. Okay.
What knowledge did you have of Vietnam before
going over there in a sense geographically,
culturally, and militarily? None whatsoever.
Okay. What would you say our goals were in Vietnam?
Well, you know, the published goal was that we
wanted to stop the... There was a domino theory of
communist aggression through Asia. And whether
that's right or wrong or not, that was the reason we
were in there, was to stop the communist
aggression against the South. And then, you know,
the domino theory being next was Thailand and
next, you know, Malaysia. Well, we obviously lost
the war, but Thailand is still not overrun.
Cambodia, of course, or Laos, is gone. But I'm not
sure that history won't show us that we might be
right. Maybe we did prevent the domino theory. I
don't know. Do you think that we followed a plan
strategically structured to achieve this goal?
No, I think what probably eventually happened was
with all the demonstrations and so on, the
anti-Vietnam feelings, I feel that Johnson, who
tended to be very egotistical, I guess, for lack of
a better word, very proud man, He's a great
patriot, really. But the thing is, I just feel that
he was determined to get this thing through, and I
think it just wore him down. I forget what your
question is. I started rambling there. Just the
strategic structure. So strategically, I think
that Johnson and maybe even the military, because
he as commander-in-chief runs the military, ran
the military, I think that they forgot what their
mission was and got the politics involved in it,
and they were worried about reelection and so on.
Everything just went to hell. Do you think that the
American military was overconfident in its
approach to Vietnam before Tet? Before Tet, I
think they were, you know, I still think that they
feel they could have won it if they'd been allowed
to use all their artillery, so to speak. Mm-hmm.
But they were really, they were hamstrung, and
they had never fought a guerrilla war before. And
it was a very frustrating war. We have a friend of
ours who was a forward observer, and he said he laid
for two days as a forward observer observing a rice
paddy, because they had to cross that rice paddy,
and he never saw a movement. So he called his
platoon to cross the rice paddy, and they were all
killed. Laying underneath the rice paddy,
breathing through reeds, were Viet Congs. And
they'd been there the 48 hours he was there, and God
knows how long before that. And they just wiped out
his whole platoon. And he said they were just
covered with leeches. So you talk about patience
and frustration. That's a war that we had never
known before.
What, if anything, should we have done
differently as far as the war was concerned? Well,
if you wanted to win the war, you should have won it,
I think. And probably the best way to do that would
have been... I don't know if you could have bombed
them back to the Stone Ages, as General LeMay said,
but I guess that's probably what would have
happened. That certainly would have, if they
wiped them off the face of the earth, you would have
either, you know, for whatever reason, you know,
as I say, war is a nasty thing. And there's no nice
way to win a war. But I think if we went in there and we
intended to win it, we should have won it. And the
only way you're going to do is bomb them back to the
Stone Age, like Curtis LeMay suggested. And he was
an Air Force general. He should know something
about it. um could you give me a general comparison
of your perceptions at the various times that you
were there how they might have changed my
perceptions right your perceptions just your
ideas i i think i probably alluded to them in the
conversation so far you know each time i went back i
kind of got more frustrated by it all too you know
you hear the same things you just i saw guys maimed
by booby traps and you know legs blown off and eyes
blown out from concussion grenades and And it was
just, you know, it was a very frustrating thing. We
were trying to fight a war with all this elaborate
equipment, and they're out there with sticks and
stones, and it was just a frustrating thing. And I
guess the thing that probably turned me against
him more than anything else was I got the
impression, and I could well be wrong, but it's my
impression, that the South Vietnamese didn't
really care. The rank and file, the peasants, I
mean. I don't know about the government. What
political reaction did you see concerning the My
Lime Massacre in March of 1968 under the command of
Lieutenant Calley? It's interesting you ask that
because the same person I referred to earlier, who
laid there for 48 hours waiting to cross the rice
paddy, later on was in Calley's platoon when that
happened. And the reason it happened, and few
people know this, in fact I've never seen it in
print, And I know this is true because the person
who told me was there, and he doesn't have a
tendency to exaggerate or no reason for him to lie
about it. What it was, every day or every week or
whatever it was, they would take these trucks and
all through My Lai, and Cali was their commander,
and they would stop like GIs tend to do and give the
kids chocolates and cigarettes and all that type
of stuff and just kind of have a little picnic.
Well, then they get down the road, three or four or
five or ten miles, and all the trucks would start
blowing up for no apparent reason. And people were
getting killed. I mean, all of them, you know, they
were getting wiped out. Well, what they found out
was that when they were stopping, these little
kids in My Lai, and the sympathetic people, their
parents or whatever, they were taking all the
chocolate candies. When they weren't looking,
what they were doing was pulling pins from hand
grenades and wrapping a rubber band around the
hand grenade and dropping it in the gas tank of the
truck. the same people you're being nice to. And
then when you get down the road, of course, the
gasoline would erode that rubber band, and up you
go. Well, the reaction of the people that have been
getting their people killed was to go back and take
care of the source that was causing this to happen,
which were the My Lai kids and families. And that's
where the My Lai massacre came from, and that's why
it happened. And frankly, as a person, if you're
really going to analyze war, I feel sorry for Cali.
He did exactly what he had to do. Okay. My next
question then was going to be your opinion of
Lieutenant Calley as a commander. I take it that
you think that... I don't know how many people he
lost, but there were trucks. They couldn't figure
out for several weeks what was going on. So he lost
several truckloads of troops by these same
people. And as I say, war is ugly. So he went back and
he bit off the hand that was doing it. All right.
What is your opinion of the manner in which the
trial of Lieutenant Calley was handled,
especially the publicity? Well, I think what I
just said you've never seen in print, and I'm
convinced in my heart that it's true because the
person who told me was there. But you'll never see
in print that they had any excuse to do what they
did. It's kind of like now you're reading about,
oh, terrible President Reagan killing that
little kid in Libya. Well, what about the kid that
was sucked through the TWA plane? No one ever talks
about that when they... when the Libyans bombed
it. So, as I say, there's no nice answer to it.
That's just the price you pay for war and for
terrorism. Besides, what the hell... An adult's
life is just as valuable as a kid's. It's just a
sentiment that people seem to have. Do you
think... What sort of reason do you think there is
that the media would not be showing things from
that point of view? I can't speak for the media.
They still don't, in my opinion. They show things
that are, first of all, going to create interest,
and secondly, sell newspapers. And the My Lai
thing, no one can, I guess, morally go around
saying, well, Lieutenant Kelly was wrong for
killing kids. But the thing is, some of the Viet
Cong forces were 11 and 12 years old, too. Are they
kids just because they're soldiers? What the
hell's the difference? If they're killing your
people and it's a war, then you have to annihilate
them. Age is not a factor, I don't think. Do you
think Lieutenant Calley was used as a scapegoat
for the American people and for the military? Yes,
but I can't give any reasons why. I mean, it's my
opinion that he was. I think it's a shame that of all
the tragedies and all the all the horrible things
that happen in vietnam being single out one person
to uh to be tried and convicted i mean i guess you you
could do the same thing to every pilot that dropped
napalm and burned some little girl or some little
kid that never happened that was accepted as being
part of war tragic though it is i yeah i think kelly
was escaping i sure do um
You've somewhat answered this question, but I'm
going to go ahead and answer it again, or ask it
again. What role did it appear to you that the media
played? What's your opinion of that role? And what
effects, if any, do you think that the media had on
the war? Oh, they had all the effect on the war.
That's the first time ever that the American
public saw killing on live TV. We saw the war in our
living room. That's why it was so controversial.
The media, and I'm not saying it's right or wrong,
that's just the way that television is today, but
that's the first time the American people ever had
war in their living room. They saw it, they had
strong opinions for it, or against it for the most
part, because as I say, first of all, they're not
trained for war, soldiers are trained for war, and
they're not used to seeing this carnage. And they
did turn against it, and the media had a tremendous
amount to do with it. Could you give me your
perceptions of the domestic demonstrations? In
particular,
what was your role during the domestic
demonstrations? How did they change over the
years? What effect did they have on the
government? How did they affect the President in
his personal life also? And what effect did they
have on political policies? THE PRESIDENT. Well,
you might have to – I might have to ask you again some
of those things. But basically, first of all, they
started out as a very small group, and then they
just grew and grew and grew. And some of this was
from the media. And they were strong. For the most
part, they were young kids who chose not to go to
Vietnam for whatever reason or were opposed to it
politically and philosophically. But the thing
was that they got larger as the war went on and they
got more militant to where they became very
destructive. I mean, I saw times when I was in the
middle of these people with Humphrey One time at
Stanford, they got so bad that, frankly, they were
worse than anything I ever saw in Vietnam. These
same peaceniks, so to speak. And the fact is that
they were not that way at all. They were very, very
militant people. But I have to give them the
benefit of the doubt and say they were speaking
their conscience. I don't know that they were. I
think some of them are out there just for a lark. I
think there's some communist infiltration in it,
frankly. I think there's some anti-American
infiltration in it. The media gave a complete
coverage. And the more coverage they got, it's no
different than terrorism. You know, I think it
would probably, the reason terrorists do what
they do is to get coverage and get sympathy of the
world. And that's what the Vietnam demonstrators
do. As far as my role, and I was in it every day with
Humphrey, and it was very difficult, frankly. We
were spit on and kicked and everything else every
day. So it was very difficult. Now, I specify that
it was Humphrey because Johnson, they got so bad,
he was a prisoner of the White House. He could not go
out. And that's why he couldn't run for president
in 1968. It wasn't that he didn't want to. He
couldn't. He could not fiscally campaign. They
would have kept him off the streets. And that's why
he chose not to run again. So, yeah, did they set
political policy? You bet your life they did. They
made Richard Nixon president.
A lot of times it's been stated by a number of people
that the first... I guess militant act was by the
United States at Kent State in particular. What do
you think about that? Do you think it was a reaction
of the United States government against the
demonstrators? Do you think it was just people got
caught up in what was going on and maybe made some
decisions that might not have been the best? I
think when it all started out, there were very
sincere kids at Kent State, and I say kids for like
students, It's not all more students. Some of them
were runaways and some were renegades. But for the
most part, they were a group of students who were
anti-Vietnam and were showing their
constitutional right to protest. And like all
these things, they tend to get out of hand. This one
did. The National Guard was called out for
whatever reason. They were called out. And then,
if you know anything about National Guard, for the
most part, they're young guys, too, who've never
had any formal training. They go one weekend a
month. And when it got violent, my guess is, and
this is only a guess, that someone somewhere gave
the order to fire and a bunch of nervous kids called
National Guard soldiers fired. And they killed
some people. I think it was a misunderstanding on
both sides. I think it was a tragedy on both sides.
It was something that started out very
well-meaning and got out of hand, and people died.
What was Two's government like? You said that you
were there for the inauguration. Maybe you can
just give me your perceptions of the inauguration
and then any knowledge. I really don't know what
his government was like. I really don't. I know Key
was his vice president. He was kind of a flamboyant
guy. Two, the observations I made, was a very, very
sincere, interested, anti-communist man. Now,
how he got to where he is, I don't know the history of
Two. uh... whether the election was fair i don't
know i do know that he tried to run a democratic type
of government and as you know he now lives in
connecticut or somewhere he didn't do very well
with it and two lives in california or key rather so
for whatever i i i really don't know what kind of
government he ran it was quasi military obviously
but uh... whether he was elected legally i you know
It could be another Marcos deal for all I know. I
really don't know. Okay.
What was your opinion of the South Vietnamese
people? I found them to be very, for the most part,
peasant, for the most part, passive, for the most
part, probably uninformed.
They just wanted to grow rice and have babies and be
left alone. But, and again, that's only, that's my
perception of them. The military, I think it was
all by conscription. And they got in the military
and they were trained and they were told to go fight
your brothers in the north. And some did and some
didn't. But for the most part, I found them a very
patient Asiatic
people.
What was your opinion of Arvin? I don't have very
high regard for them, frankly. And again, I
alluded earlier to times when they've turned on
our forces. They would run in times of crises.
I've had both the South Korean forces and the
American forces tell me they're not worth a darn.
The best forces I saw there, frankly, were the
South Koreans. A number of people have said that.
The ROK, they call them the ROK forces, Republic of
Korea. And again, they were trained by us from
Korea. They weren't very good in Korea in 1950
either, but they're certainly good now.
What was your opinion of the South Vietnamese
Secret Service? Did you cooperate with them? Did
they cooperate with you? I never knew they had a
Secret Service per se. I'm sure it was part of their
infrastructure of their military. But any time we
were there, we always dealt strictly with the
military. And now if the guy wearing the uniform
was Secret Service, I didn't know that. I didn't
ask. I didn't care. So again, I have no opinion. I
don't even know if they have a thing called the
Secret Service. You say they did, they did. Okay.
How much did... Well, I guess this would be a
difficult question for you to answer. I was going
to say, how much did you spy on each other? But if you
really weren't aware of the South Vietnam Secret
Service, then... I mean, we had no reason to spy on
anyone. We were there for anywhere from five days
to eight days, and we tried to stay alive and get the
heck out of there. I think I'm talking more in terms
of maybe just militarily. Well, you know, we were,
again, working within the confines of the
American military. The things we were very
careful with was our radio transmission because
we knew they were probably being monitored. But
that's true in every foreign country. You know, we
never say anything over the telephone. We didn't
want the world to know. But that's true of any
foreign country. There's really nothing
different there that we did that you wouldn't do if
you were visiting today to France.
Okay. The only difference is people should
mention it. Nice difference. Were you aware of any
corruption within the government, Arvin, or the
Secret Service? If so... I'm sure that there was so
much money going into and aid going into South
Vietnam I'm sure there was corruption involved.
I'm sure there was money that never got to where it
was supposed to go. I didn't see a lot of it. I used to
see Key with a lot of $5 bills in his pocket at times.
But
I don't think it's any different than any other
dictatorial type of government. And what the heck
it was that, you know, Marcus, look at all the aid we
gave Marcus. Now look what he's done with it,
apparently. I'm sure some of that went on in
Vietnam. Not all that went for milk and honey was
spent on milk and honey, I'm sure. They went in
somebody's pocket. I didn't really see it, but I
heard it from people who should know that it was a
substantial amount of it. But my lord, I don't know
how many million dollars a day of aid the United
States were sending to Vietnam. You probably
know. But, you know, it was just mind-boggling,
the money going in there. What was it, a million
dollars a day we spent in Vietnam? Something like
that. And if you get a few people that have sticky
fingers, you've got a million dollars a day coming
in every day, and they only want to steal $10,000 a
day, that's not very much out of a million, but if
you steal $10,000 every day, that's a hell of a lot.
Yeah, I think there's a lot of corruption,
frankly.
Could you give me your perceptions on the
following people? First of all, Humphrey.
Humphrey was probably one of the brightest, most
well-read patriots I've ever met in my life. He was
a true American. Politically, I wasn't in full
agreement with him. I professed to be a
conservative. He professed to be a liberal. I'm
not sure I know what those two things mean. So we had
different philosophies of politics. But I will
say this about him. He's the only true liberal I
ever met. Most liberals, they scream for busing
and put their kids in private schools. Humphrey
didn't do that. He used to say that he firmly
believed that all men are created equal in the eyes
of God. He used to say that he never could
understand why it took 50,000 laws to govern 10
commandments. Well, and that's a very
commendable statement. Maybe naive, but it's
commendable. But that's really the way he was. He
was a very gentle man, a very bright man, and I feel
would have made a good president. I think what he
did, because of the television today, um he came
across to the american public as being weak as a
weak person the fact is he was a very kind and gentle
person and i think they mistook that kind and
gentle characteristic as being a weak person i
think if humphrey would have been running for
president prior to the television era he may well
have won it he was not for some reason now you have to
be attractive to be president or whatever the word
is they use, charisma, whatever the hell that
means. A lot of people have stated that. It doesn't
make any sense. Charisma does nothing for you. In
fact, I've heard it say that Humphrey had a very
high forehead. And I heard a guy tell him one time,
Hubert, on television, you look like a
hydrocephalic. Well, it wasn't a very nice thing
to say, but he probably did. I think, and getting
back to your media question, yeah, I think the
media does a lot to influence politics today and
not all of it's good.
Okay, what were your perceptions of Johnson?
Johnson was a very strong man, a very proud man, a
very well-versed political expert. He
understood all the workings of politics. He
understood the American system to a T. He started
from the bottom and went to the top through the
political system of this country. He knew all the
soft spots in people. He understood human needs.
He understood what made people do and don't do
things. He was a master at it. I think the thing that
brought Lyndon down, I call him Lyndon, President
Johnson down, was his... his Texas tenacity, so to
speak. And by golly, I'm always right. And he
didn't listen to his advisors on Vietnam. And he
just got so paranoid about it that it destroyed
him.
What about Westmoreland? I like Westmoreland. I
thought he was a good commander. In fact, I have a
picture out there with him if you'd like to see it
before you leave. He was a good soldier, a very
respected soldier. The troops liked him. He was
always in the field with them. He was always in the
front lines. Every time we went through hospitals
in Vietnam, he was always there. The troops loved
him. I think Westmoreland's problem was that when
you get to be that high, when you get up with stars on
your shoulders, then you become part of the
political system. Because I think there are
politics involved in everything, not least of
which is the military. So he did have some
political pressures put on him. I think as a
soldier, he probably did some things or was forced
to do some things that he didn't read in the book of
Westmoreland. But I liked Westmoreland. I think
he got caught up in the politics of it all, too,
under the power of Lyndon Johnson, who was his
boss.
What about the LBJ administration in general? Oh,
I think probably they're getting a lot of credit
for things they shouldn't. What he did, the LBJ
administration did nothing more than continue
with the things that Kennedy started.
Johnson got credit for a lot of things that I don't
know, but it'd be my opinion that if he were elected
president, he would not have done. I don't think he
was a big firm advocate of civil rights,
personally. although he was almost forced to be
because Kennedy had already got those things, the
Peace Corps and so on, in motion during his three
years in office. So Johnson just carried those
things on, which was politically a very
intelligent thing to do. But I think the Johnson
administration will go down in history,
unfortunately, as a bad administration because
of Vietnam. Vietnam destroyed him, and all the
other things, I think, are second to none. And
finally, what were your perceptions of Two?
President Two? As I say, I only observed him. I
never spoke a word to the man in my life. He
seemed... I don't know where he came from. I don't
know anything about his background. I don't know
how he was elected. I think he was an honorable man,
apparently.
When I went to his inauguration in 66, he seemed to
be... Very much accepted by the people. Of course,
the people that were there to applaud him were
probably his friends. I don't know. But I really
don't have any in-depth opinions about two,
frankly. And I apologize. That's fine. Are there
any other things that you can think of that would be
interesting to tell me or that you'd like to talk
about? Well, I would hope we learn from it. I think
the United States should have learned from it. I'm
not sure we have. I see the same thing raising its
ugly head in Honduras. If we're not careful, we're
going to get the same thing down there. I don't know
how you handle terrorism, and that's really what
it was. The things that the Viet Cong did are
incomprehensible to the American mind. The
tunnels they dug. There are hospitals
underground. Hospitals dug underground. Where
did they put all the dirt? No one's ever seen the
dirt yet. When they tunneled out, what were they
doing with the dirt? I mean, they literally
carried stuff for hundreds of miles on their back.
And they're just a very ingenious, innovative
people. And I think if we fought them for a thousand
years, we'd never beat them because they just had
wings. We couldn't live the way they live. Our guys
can't live underneath a rice paddy with leeches in
their body for a week. They can't live underground
in tunnels for months and never come up. They're
like rats. And I don't mean that disparagingly,
but that's the way they, they live like animals.
And there's, you know, if we learned anything, it
was said before we ever got involved in Vietnam,
but don't ever again get caught in a ground war in
Asia, because they'll destroy you. The only way we
ever beat the Japanese was to bomb them.
Why do you think it is that they seem to have this
ability to do these things? Do you think it was a
fact of the way they had been raised culturally?
Sure, it's part of their culture, yeah. No doubt
about it. They're very, very patient people. They
were very strong-willed people. They're very
proud people. And, again, they just have a
different framework on what's important. The
Americans are very impatient. I mean, I just got
back from North Yemen, which is the same way. Time
means nothing to them. They show you a house
they've lived in for 800 years. A family lived in
the same house for 800 years. I mean, you can have a
meeting with them at 3 o'clock this afternoon.
They might show up next Sunday and think nothing of
it. I mean, what's a week when you're talking about
civilization? And that's kind of the way the
North, the Vietnamese are. And the Asiatic mind is
just that way. It's not quite like, you know, you
tend to hear about the Mexican mind on mañana, you
know. Well, tomorrow is not very far off. These
people are talking in years. They're talking
about decades. They're talking about centuries.
Big difference. And we Americans will never
comprehend that thinking. Never. How much
importance would you place on the survival factor
as far as their ability to do these things? Do you
think that that was important, the fact that it was
in their country and that they were fighting for
their lives, or not necessarily just their lives,
their home? Well, I guess there's some of that. I
mean, I've never talked to a Viet Cong, but
obviously they were dedicated. They were
dedicated to something, be it Buddha or Ho Chi
Minh. I don't know. But they were dedicated, and
boy, they thought nothing about dying. I was in a
hospital one day, an American hospital in the
field with Humphrey, and Westmoreland was with
us. And there were all these American troops in
these cots in this field army hospital that had
been wounded more than four hours. I mean, someone
with their legs blown off, still bleeding from it.
On the end cot in that tent was a Viet Cong who'd been
wounded. So the Americans brought him in to try to
patch him up. He had one arm blown off and both his
legs blown off at the knees and all these other
marks of, I guess he stepped in a mine or something.
But here he is in an American hospital, set up in
that cot and spit at Westmoreland. Now, that's
either a very crazy person or a very dedicated,
faithful servant. And my guess is it's the latter.
Yeah. Yeah. That's the mentality our troops are
fighting. Our troops are out there saying, why am I
here? I'll be home soon. I'll be here for a year. I
hope I don't die today. Or I hope when I climb, I hope
that snake doesn't bite me. They're in an
environment that's completely alien to them, in a
jungle. And these people, life doesn't mean that
much to them. It's whatever's inside them that
makes them tick. And I don't know what that is. But
they're very dedicated, and they're very
difficult, and they're very tough.
Thanks. You're welcome. How many people are you
interviewing?